---
title: "What RSS is and why we should keep using it"
date: 2022-02-01
layout: post
category: "l-informatico-di-famiglia"
---

Have you already subscribed to my blog? If so, this post is probably not for you. 
Have you tried to click on the Subscribe button at the bottom of this page but were scared away by a weird looking webpage full of angular braces? Keep reading. 
Do you just want to find out more about an amazing web 1.0 technology that is now more then ever needed? You've come to the right place.

## What RSS is
As you might suspect, RSS is an acronym. I've always thought it stood for Really Simple Syndication, which sounds somewhat mysterious, but while doing some research for this blog post I found two more denominations: RDF[¹](#notes) Site Summary and Rich Site Summary. 
The latter is probably the most self-explanatory: RSS is something (to be precise, a text file, usually referred to as a _feed_, in a standardized, machine-readable format) that sums up the contents of a certain website.

If you've ever opened an RSS feed (you can try [right now](https://harisont.github.io/feed.xml)), you've probably noticed that "machine-readable" doesn't provide us humans with a pleasing reading experience. In fact, we aren't supposed to _read_ RSS feeds directly: we're supposed to _subscribe_ to them and have a program (literally a _feed reader_) present them in a nicer way.

## Why RSS is falling into oblivion
Back in the late 90s, when RSS was invented, subscribing to RSS feeds was a _Really Simple_, if not The Simplest way to get updates from a webpage: you had to download a feed reader, give it the URLs of a bunch of interesting RSS feeds and you were good to go - you'd never miss an update or get distracted by content you hadn't explicitly opted into. 

Sounds like a dream? Well, it's reality, or at least it used to be. 
Until recently, RSS was everywhere: news sites, blogs and all sorts of frequently updated webpages would have an RSS feed. Podcasts were all distributed through RSS, and even YouTube, when it came into being, had RSS feeds ready for you to subscribe to (spoiler: it still has them, but you probably never noticed - try pasting your favorite channel's address into your feed reader!).

So, you might be wondering, if RSS is so great and has been around for so long, why have I never even heard of it? Has it just gotten out of fashion because it was too cumbersome to use? The answer is... yes and no. RSS has been out of fashion for a while (to be precise, from the early 2010s), but from a user perspective, it is _really simple_, I promise. If you're not convinced, jump to [How to RSS](#how-to-rss).

### Subscribing to feed X vs. following Y on Z
Remember what happened to Internet in the 2010s? It was the beginning of the web 2.0, which, in practice, means that we started using social networks. And social networks, almost by definition, have built-in functionalities to follow people and organizations.
This was already a major threat for RSS, and as soon as platform such as Facebook started becoming more popular, everyone started "following" and "liking" instead of "subscribing". Pretty much the same thing. 

...Or it is? Well, in my opinion, following social media profiles is very different from subcribing to websites via RSS, for two main reasons:

1. If you replace your RSS reader with, say, Instagram, you will only be able to follow people who have an Instagram account. And vice versa, content creators, in order to be followed by you, will need to be on Instragram and adapt their content to the functionalities offered by the platform, even if they dislike it platform and create content (let's say long blog posts such as this one) it is not optimized for
2. Most social networks will track you and show you ads, while RSS can't do the former and doesn't generally do the latter.

### 
But things do get worse, because with social networks come _recommender systems_. A recommender system is a computer program that thinks it knows what content you want to consume and performs a selection for you. Nowadays, many recommender systems are quite good at their job (for example, I like YouTube's) because they're based on Machine Learning. This means that, specifically, a social media platform's recommender system learns _from you_ and what you do when you use that platform. If you're unfamiliar with the term _recommender system_, you might want to reread this section replacing it mentally with its pop name "Algorithm"[²](#notes).

I'm not against recommender systems (and, of course, I'm not against algorithms!), but I think they should be used responsibly and, preferably in conjunction with other ways to get information. In particular, you should keep the following in mind:

1. __lack of reliability__: recommender systems will typically not show you _everything_ that the people you follow share (YouTube has a way to prevent this from happening if you explicitly say so, but not all social networks do). At the same time, they will not show you _only_ content from creators you have actively chosen to follow. This means that you might miss some updates from your favorite artist while being bombarded with photos by travel bloggers you've never heard about, but that you "might also like"
2. __bubble effect__: recommender systems will show you content similar to what you've enjoyed (or otherwise strongly reacted to) watching/reading/listening to in the past. The risk is then that, without you noticing, recommender systems isolate you (and probably your friends) inside some kind of "bubble" that is only reached by a certain type of information. If you've looked up covid restriction several times but never followed LGBTQ+ activists, you might get timely updates about [Sweden's recent decision to lift restriction](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-02-03/sweden-lifts-covid-restrictions-as-pandemic-enters-new-phase) but have no clue about [what's happening in Florida](https://abcnews.go.com/US/dont-gay-bill-moves-forward-florida/story?id=82481565). In other words, social media isn't a good source for news.
## How to RSS
To enjoy RSS for the numerous things it is still applicable to, you need a __feed reader__ and one or more __feeds__ you want to follow.

As I mentioned, a feed reader is a program able to present the content of RSS feeds in a pleasant way.
At the moment I'm using [Fluent Reader](https://hyliu.me/fluent-reader/) an open source, advanced, multiplatform desktop application. 
If you're a fan of command-line software, or if you just want something more lightweight, you might want to try [Newsboat](https://newsboat.org/) instead.

On smartphones and tablets, there's also a wide variety of free apps. On F

### Podcasts

TODO: you need a feed and a reader (with sw recommendations: AntennaPod, Fluent Reader, something from F-droid...) 

### Find all the feeds
TODO: recommender systems, spotify, youtube (still better, bell is similar), Rai Sound... dystopian cases etc.

TODO: extension for hidden feeds

## Extra: but how does an RSS feed look like?
TODO: so far, conceptual model (digression). Now, let's look at this blog's feed (analyze xml).

## Extra: OPML files
TODO: explain, include mine (podcasts and blogs)

## Extra: how to make your own feed

---

## References
- [RSS on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSS)
- Nicky Case, [_Back to the Future with RSS!_](https://blog.ncase.me/back-to-the-future-with-rss/)

## Notes
¹ Resource Description Framework. Yes, another acronym...
² There is a tendency to misuse the term "algorithm" which brings people to think that algorithm == recommender system of a social network. In reality, algorithms used in the implementation of recommender systems are only a small subset of the enormous set of all existing algorithms, which includes, among others, food recipes and morning routines.