---
title: "What RSS is and why we should keep using it"
date: 2022-02-01
layout: post
category: "l-informatico-di-famiglia"
---

Have you already subscribed to my blog? If so, this post is probably not for you. 
Have you tried to click on the Subscribe button at the bottom of this page but were scared away by a weird looking webpage full of angular braces? Keep reading. 
Do you just want to find out more about an amazing web 1.0 technology that is now more then ever needed? You've come to the right place.

## What RSS is
As you might suspect, RSS is an acronym. I've always thought it stood for Really Simple Syndication, which sounds somewhat mysterious, but while doing some research for this blog post I found two more denominations: RDF[ยน](#notes) Site Summary and Rich Site Summary. 
The latter is probably the most self-explanatory: RSS is something (to be precise, a text file, usually referred to as a _feed_, in a standardized, machine-readable format) that sums up the contents of a certain website.

If you've ever opened an RSS feed (you can try [right now](https://harisont.github.io/feed.xml)), you've probably noticed that "machine-readable" doesn't provide us humans with a pleasing reading experience. In fact, we aren't supposed to _read_ RSS feeds directly: we're supposed to _subscribe_ to them and have a program (literally a _feed reader_) present them in a nicer way.

## Why RSS is falling into oblivion
Back in the late 90s, when RSS was invented, subscribing to RSS feeds was a _Really Simple_, if not The Simplest way to get updates from a webpage: you had to download a feed reader, give it the URLs of a bunch of interested RSS feeds and you were good to go - you'd never miss an update or get distracted by content you hadn't explicitly opted into. Sounds like a dream? Well, it's reality, or at least it used to be. Until recently, RSS was everywhere: news sites, blogs and all sorts of frequently updated webpages would have an RSS feed. Podcasts were all distributed through RSS. Even YouTube, when it came into being, had RSS feeds ready for you to subscribe to (spoiler: it still has them, but you probably never noticed).

So, you might be wondering, if RSS is so great and has been around for so long, why have I never even heard of it? Has it just gotten out of fashion because it was too cumbersome to use? The answer is... yes and no. RSS has been out of fashion for a while (to be precise, from the early 2010s), but from a user perspective, it is _really simple_, I promise. If you're not convinced, jump to [the next section](#how-to-rss).

Remember what happened in the 2010s? It was the beginning of the web 2.0, which, in practice, means that we started using social networks. And social networks, almost by definition, have built-in functionalities to follow people and organizations.
This was already a major threat for RSS, and as soon as platform such as Facebook started becoming more popular, everyone started "following" and "liking" instead of "subscribing". Pretty much the same thing. Or it is? Well, in my opinion, following Facebook pages is very different from subcribing to websites via RSS, for two main reasons:

1. If you replace your RSS reader with, say, Instagram, you will only be able to follow people who have an Instagram account. And vice versa, content creators will need to be on Instragram and adapt their content to the functionalities offered by the platform in order to be followed by you, even if they dislike the platform and create content the platform is no good for (let's say, all they want to do is publish long blog posts)
2. Most social networks will track you and show you ads.

But things do get worse, because with social networks come _recommender systems_. A recommender system is a computer program that thinks it knows what content you want to consume and performs a selection for you. Nowadays, many recommender systems are quite good at their job (for example, I like YouTube's) because they're based on Machine Learning. This means that, specifically, a social media platform's recommender system learns _from you_ and what you do when you use that platform. If you're unfamiliar with the term _recommender system_, reread this section mentally replacing it with its pop name "The Algorithm".

I'm not against recommender systems (and, of course, I'm not against algorithms!), but I think they should be used responsibly and, preferably in conjunction with other ways to get information. In particular, you should keep in mind that:

1. __lack of reliability__: recommender systems will typically not show you _everything_ that the people you follow do, and at the same time, they will not show you _only_ content from creators you have actively chosen to follow. This means that you might miss some updates from your favorite artist while being bombarded with photos by travel bloggers you've never heard about, but that you "might like"
2. __bubble effect__: recommender systems will show you content similar to what you've enjoyed watching/reading/listening to in the past. In other words, they're not the best source for news. The risk is that, because you


TODO: recommender systems, spotify, youtube (still better, bell is similar), Rai Sound... dystopian cases etc.

## How to RSS
TODO: you need a feed and a reader (with sw recommendations: AntennaPod, Fluent Reader, something from F-droid...) 

### Find all the feeds
TODO: extension for hidden feeds

## Extra: but how does an RSS feed look like?
TODO: so far, conceptual model (digression). Now, let's look at this blog's feed (analyze xml).

## Extra: OPML files
TODO: explain, include mine (podcasts and blogs)

## Extra: how to make your own feed

---

## References
- [RSS on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSS)
- Nicky Case, [_Back to the Future with RSS!_](https://blog.ncase.me/back-to-the-future-with-rss/)

## Notes
ยน Resource Description Framework. Yes, another acronym...