---
title: "Korp tips and tricks: using CQP labels to search for dependency structures"
date: 2023-10-09
layout: post
category: external
langs: ["en"]
---

> __NOTE:__ This post was originally published [on the Språkbanken Text blog](https://spraakbanken.gu.se/blogg/20231009-korp-tips-and-tricks-using-cqp-labels-to-search-for-dependency-structures).
> Its target audience is primarily people at [my institution](https://www.gu.se/en/swedish) and potentially other (compuational) linguists who already use Korp, our corpus search tool.
> If you are new to Korp, you can find its user manual [here](https://spraakbanken.gu.se/en/tools/korp/user-manual).

---

_This post was inspired by [Márton András Tóth](https://www.gu.se/om-universitetet/hitta-person/martontoth)'s mid seminar and written in consultation with [Martin Hammarstedt](https://spraakbanken.gu.se/om/personal/martin)._

Say you are a linguist studying the use of present perfect in contemporary Swedish. Surely, you think, [Korp](https://spraakbanken.gu.se/korp) has plenty of example sentences.

The present perfect is a compound tense, consisting of the auxiliary _har_ (the present tense form of the verb "to have") and a main verb in its supine form[^1].
So, you select Extended Search and perform this query:

{% include image.html file="../assets/img/cqp/harsup.png" description="A first attempt to look for present perfect constructions using Korp's Extended Search functionality. The graphical query displayed in the image looks for 2-word sequences where the present tense of the verb 'ha' is followed by a supine" %}


The [results](https://spraakbanken.gu.se/korp/#?cqp=%5B%5D&%20msd%20_=%20%22VB%5C.PRS%5C.AKT%22%5D%20%5B(msd%20_%3D%20%22VB%5C.SUP%5C.AKT%22%20%7C%20msd%20_%3D%20%22VB%5C.SUP%5C.SFO%22)%5D&corpus=attasidor,da,svt-2004,svt-2005,svt-2006,svt-2007,svt-2008,svt-2009,svt-2010,svt-2011,svt-2012,svt-2013,svt-2014,svt-2015,svt-2016,svt-2017,svt-2018,svt-2019,svt-2020,svt-2021,svt-2022,svt-2023,svt-nodate&search_tab=2&lang=eng&%20msd%20=%20%22.*VB%5C.PRS%5C.AKT.*%22%5D%20%5B%5D*%20%5B(msd%20%3D%20%22.*VB%5C.SUP%5C.AKT.*%22%20%7C%20msd%20%3D%20%22.*VB%5C.SUP%5C.SFO.*%22)%5D&search=cqp%7C%5Blemma%20contains%20%22ha%22%20%26%20msd%20%3D%20%22.*VB%5C.PRS%5C.AKT.*%22%5D%20%5B%5D*%20%5B(msd%20%3D%20%22.*VB%5C.SUP%5C.AKT.*%22%20%7C%20msd%20%3D%20%22.*VB%5C.SUP%5C.SFO.*%22)%5D) look okay, but you quickly realize that your query only allows you to find supine forms __immediately preceded__ by the auxiliary _har_.
You switch to Advanced search and take a look at the CQP query Korp was running under the hood:  

```cqp
[lemma contains "ha" & msd = ".*VB\.PRS\.AKT.*"] [(msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.AKT.*" | msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.SFO.*")]
```

This reads as "find any occurrence of the verb "ha" (`lex contains "ha\.\.vb\.1"`) conjugated in the present tense (`msd = ".*VB\.PRS\.AKT.*"`)[^2] and followed by a supine (`SUP`) verb form (`VB`), active (`AKT`) or passive (`SFO`).

If you add an `[]*` between the two tokens, Korp will find all occurrences of _har_ followed by a verb in its supine form, __with any number of other tokens in between__:

```cqp
[lemma contains "ha" & msd = ".*VB\.PRS\.AKT.*"] []* [(msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.AKT.*" | msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.SFO.*")]
```

Looking at the [results](https://spraakbanken.gu.se/korp/#?lang=eng&cqp=%5B%5D&corpus=attasidor,da,svt-2004,svt-2005,svt-2006,svt-2007,svt-2008,svt-2009,svt-2010,svt-2011,svt-2012,svt-2013,svt-2014,svt-2015,svt-2016,svt-2017,svt-2018,svt-2019,svt-2020,svt-2021,svt-2022,svt-2023,svt-nodate&search_tab=2&search=cqp%7C%5Blemma%20contains%20%22ha%22%20%26%20msd%20%3D%20%22.*VB%5C.PRS%5C.AKT.*%22%5D%20%5B%5D*%20%5B(msd%20%3D%20%22.*VB%5C.SUP%5C.AKT.*%22%20%7C%20msd%20%3D%20%22.*VB%5C.SUP%5C.SFO.*%22)%5D), you start seeing interesting variations, like _Men nu __har__ det __blivit__ varmt_ and _Totalt __har__ 438 människor __räddats__ efter stormen_.
As you scroll down, however, you notice that one of the hits does not really contain a present perfect:

> _Mannen __har__ HIV och kan ha __smittat__ flickorna._ 

Of course, this sentence contains both an occurrence of the auxiliary _har_ and a supine, _smittat_.
The problem is that the former does not refer to the latter, which is in turn introduced by the infinitive _ha_.
How to avoid this?

## Advanced search with CQP labels
You start browsing the [CQP tutorial](https://cwb.sourceforge.io/files/CQP_Tutorial.pdf), looking for a way to use the information Korp provides about dependency relations[^3].
In chapter 4, you find out about __labels__, which allow giving tokens names that can be used to refer to them later in the query.  

The simplest use case for labels is searching for repetitions.
Want to find sentences where the same adverb is repeated three times in a row? Then you can just type:

```cpq
adv:[pos = "AB"] [word = adv.word] [word = adv.word]
```

This sequence, which matches sentences like

> _– Det känns __väldigt väldigt väldigt__ bra._ 

starts with an adverb (`AB`), labelled `adv` and followed by two tokens that are identical, with respects to the word form, to `adv` itself.

{% include image.html file="../assets/img/cqp/deptree.png" description="Dependency tree for the sentence 'Mannen har HIV och kan ha smittat flickorna.'" %}


But labels can also be useful for searching for specific dependency tree structures.
In your case, for instance, you can write:

```cqp
aux:[lex contains "ha\.\.vb\.1" & msd = ".*VB\.PRS\.AKT.*"] []* [(msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.AKT.*" | msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.SFO.*") & dephead=aux.ref]
```

This query finds any occurrence `aux` of the present tense of the verb "ha" followed by a supine verb for (active or passive) referring to `aux` itself (`dephead=aux.ref`), with any number of tokens in between.

## Refining the query 
To limit the amount of false positives, it can be a good idea to also specify the correct dependency relation(s) (in this case, both `VG` (Verb Group) and `IV` (nonfinite Verb) are admissible):

```cqp
aux:[lex contains "ha\.\.vb\.1" & msd = ".*VB\.PRS\.AKT.*"] []* [(msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.AKT.*" | msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.SFO.*") & dephead=aux.ref & (deprel="VG" | deprel="IV")]
```

Although a lot less common, there are also present perfect constructions where the auxiliary follows the supine rather than preceding it.
You can look for them with a similar query:

```cqp
sup:[(msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.AKT.*" | msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.SFO.*") & (deprel="VG" | deprel="IV")] []* [lex contains "ha\.\.vb\.1" & msd = ".*VB\.PRS\.AKT.*" & sup.dephead=ref]
```

This has a mere [144 hits on the default corpus selection](https://spraakbanken.gu.se/korp/#?cqp=%5B%5D&corpus=attasidor,da,svt-2004,svt-2005,svt-2006,svt-2007,svt-2008,svt-2009,svt-2010,svt-2011,svt-2012,svt-2013,svt-2014,svt-2015,svt-2016,svt-2017,svt-2018,svt-2019,svt-2020,svt-2021,svt-2022,svt-2023,svt-nodate&search_tab=2&search=cqp%7Csup:%5B(msd%20%3D%20%22.*VB%5C.SUP%5C.AKT.*%22%20%7C%20msd%20%3D%20%22.*VB%5C.SUP%5C.SFO.*%22)%20%26%20(deprel%3D%22VG%22%20%7C%20deprel%3D%22IV%22)%5D%20%5B%5D*%20%5Blex%20contains%20%22ha%5C.%5C.vb%5C.1%22%20%26%20msd%20%3D%20%22.*VB%5C.PRS%5C.AKT.*%22%20%26%20sup.dephead%3Dref%5D), many of which arguably annotation errors.

If word order is irrelevant, the two queries can easily be combined with a disjunction (`|`):

```cqp
(aux:[lex contains "ha\.\.vb\.1" & msd = ".*VB\.PRS\.AKT.*"] []* [(msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.AKT.*" | msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.SFO.*") & dephead=aux.ref & (deprel="VG" | deprel="IV")]) | sup:[(msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.AKT.*" | msd = ".*VB\.SUP\.SFO.*") & (deprel="VG" | deprel="IV")] []* [lex contains "ha\.\.vb\.1" & msd = ".*VB\.PRS\.AKT.*" & sup.dephead=ref]
```

## Notes
[^1]: There are also present perfect constructions where the auxiliary _har_ is omitted, but we will not be discuss them in this post since a finding them requires postprocessing the query results outside of Korp.
[^2]: `msd` stands for "morphosyntactic description"
[^3]: The dependency annotation scheme used in Korp is specified [here](https://cl.lingfil.uu.se/~nivre/swedish_treebank/#synt).