---
title: My first December Adventure (2025)
layout: post
---

The [December Adventure](https://eli.li/december-adventure) is a chill alternative to the [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/), which is exactly what I need in December: the darkness of this month prompts me to spend even more time on my computer, and my goal is to spend at least some of that time every day doing something I'm excited about. 
Doesn’t even really have to be code, as the person behind the initiative says. 

Adventure log:

- [Day 1: plans](#day-1-plans)
- [Day 2: WYTIWYS? WTH?!](#day-2-wytiwys-wth)
- [Day 3: LaTeX macros](#day-3-latex-macros)


## Day 1: plans
Textbook Monday around here, which leaves little room for adventure besides setting up this log.
For the first few days of the month, I'll be focusing on [wytiwys](https://github.com/harisont/wytiwys/), a programming project that is technically work but also very out of the ordinary (as well as of my comfort zone) and therefore kind of fun.
The enjoyment I often find in my job blurs the line between work and play, but I hope to soon make time for my hobby projects too.
I won't necessarily start anything new and big. 
The plan is rather to do some pleasurable software maintenance, add some new features to my everyday tools, write one or two blog posts and perhaps work on some long-term photography projects.

## Day 2: WYTIWYS? WTH?!
So, [wytiwys](https://github.com/harisont/wytiwys/) is a web-based graphical [dependency tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependency_grammar) editor and a component of a larger project aimed at making it easier to look for syntactic patterns in large text collections (WYTIWYS stands for What You Tree Is What You Search).

When [the Query Master](https://deworetzki.dev/) and I started looking into this, we found that [reactive-dep-tree](https://github.com/kirianguiller/reactive-dep-tree) does 95% of what we need, and it does it quite well, so my task is just to implement a couple extra features and make some minor tweaks.
Yet, working on wytiwys is definitely adventurous: it requires forking two (if not three) different repositories, intervening on sparsely documented code in TypeScript - a programming language I've never learned and have no ambition to learn - and, worse still, _doing frontend_.

Contrary to my expectations, I am having a blast.
Sure, progress is slow, but working in TypeScript with little documentation is akin to reading in Danish without a dictionary: I know enough Swedish to figure out what's going on, but understanding individual constructions takes some guesswork.
Satisfyingly enough, I've managed to guess my way through the code until now.
Today I actively looked up something (~~list~~ [array concatenation](https://harisont.github.io/lists/web-dev.html#array-concatenation)) for the first time, and I think it's wild.

I'm happy to report I'm almost done adding one of the most important missing features, adding and removing nodes, but less so about the current solution for additions.
I'll try to simplify the code tomorrow.

## Day 3: LaTeX macros
Change of plans!
I thought I'd have some time to work on wytiwys in the afternoon after a seminar, but that was 150% longer than I anticipated (which I didn't mind), so no lines of TypeScript were written today.

On the other hand, I _did_ squeeze a moment of productination into this morning's paper writing session and finally reminded myself how LaTeX macros work.
It's so simple I can't believe this is my first one in years:

```latex
\newcommand{\footnoteurl}[2]{
    \footnote{\href{#1}{\nolinkurl{#2}}}
} % usage: \footnoteurl{LONG-URL}{NICE-URL}
```

The macro allows me to create footnotes whose content is a single URL with a short version, rendered in the PDF, that would work if the reader copy-pasted the link in a modern browser (but not necessarily when clicked from a PDF reader) and a "full" version that is used when the reader clicks on the link.
For example, I used it as 

```latex
\footnoteurl{https://universaldependencies.org/sv/index.html}{universaldependencies.org/sv}
```